transport: Add a transport info doc (#470)
gittuf/gittuf: docs/transport/transport.md

# gittuf Remote Transfer Protocol

Last Modified: July 2, 2024

## Introduction

Alongside the `gittuf` binary, gittuf ships with a custom remote transfer
protocol binary, implementing Git's [remote-helper
interface](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitremote-helpers). We call this the
**transport** binary, named `git-remote-gittuf`.

It's an easy way to get started with using gittuf on your repository, as it
takes care of the following common operations for you:

- Creating RSL entries upon pushing your changes
- Fetching gittuf metadata when pulling changes

> [!NOTE] The transport does not perform the steps needed to *initialize* a
> gittuf repository (i.e. setting up root of trust, policy, etc.). These steps
> must be done manually for new repositories (see the [getting started
> guide](/docs/get-started.md)).

The gittuf transport supports both HTTPS and SSH remotes.

## How to Obtain

Currently, the transport must be built from source. Running `go install` will
compile the transport and place it in your `GOBIN`, which is the same location
that the `gittuf` binary is installed into.

## How to Use

> Once it's installed, using the custom transport is simple, and depends on the

Reviewer: Same thing here, I'd make this more generic and say in either case, we want the prefix prepended to the URL. Then the two subsecs.

repository you'd like to use it for.

### Using with a fresh `git clone`

> When running `git clone`, just append `gittuf::` to the beginning of the URL of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running `git clone`, add `gittuf::` to the beginning of the URL of
```

append usually means at the end of

also "just" etc sound too much like marketing speak. We want this to be closer to a manpage.

# gittuf Remote Transfer Protocol

Last Modified: July 2, 2024

## Introduction

Alongside the `gittuf` binary, gittuf ships with a custom remote transfer
protocol binary, implementing Git's [remote-helper
interface](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitremote-helpers). We call this the
**transport** binary, named `git-remote-gittuf`.

It's an easy way to get started with using gittuf on your repository, as it
takes care of the following common operations for you:

- Creating RSL entries upon pushing your changes

> - Verifying changes you pull down

Reviewer: Fetching gittuf metadata when pulling changes

we haven't enabled verification yet fyi

> [!NOTE] The transport does not perform the steps needed to *initialize* a

> > gittuf repository (i.e. setting up root of trust, policy, etc...). These steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> gittuf repository (i.e. setting up root of trust, policy, etc.). These steps
```

> must be done manually for new repositories (see the [getting started
> guide](/docs/get-started.md)).

> The gittuf transport supports both HTTPS and SSH remotes, as with the standard

Reviewer: > as with the standard one

Could you clarify? Unsure what this means

# gittuf Remote Transfer Protocol

Last Modified: July 1, 2024

## Introduction

> Alongside the `gittuf` binary, gittuf ships with a custom remote transfer

Reviewer: let's link to and highlight right off the bat that it implements the git remote-helper interface

protocol binary. We call this the **transport** binary, named
`git-remote-gittuf`.

It's an easy way to get started with using gittuf on your repository, as it
takes care of the following common operations for you:

- Creating RSL entries upon pushing your changes
- Verifying changes you pull down

> As time goes on, the transport will perform other "best-practice" operations

Reviewer: I'd drop this. Let's just have a list of things it currently does, we can update as new features are added.

automatically in the background.

This transport is intended to serve as a drop-in replacement for the standard

> Git transport. For more information on the technical details of how Git transfer

Reviewer: This is confusing, especially as `git:` exists. Let's just say it currently supports http(s) and ssh as the underlying transports.

Reviewer: I'd also take out the transfer protocol links.

protocols work, visit
[the official Git documentation.](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Transfer-Protocols)

## How to Obtain

### `make install`

Running `make install` will compile the transport and place it in your `GOBIN`,
which is the same location that the `gittuf` binary is installed into. 

> ### Downloading a release from GitHub

Reviewer: We don't want to add this to releases just yet. Let's get it more stable.

Reviewer: I'd add a clarifying note saying currently it must be installed from source. I'd also point to go install directly rather than make, as the latter needs them to clone the repo.

TBD?

## How to Use

Once it's installed, using the custom transport is simple, and depends on the
repository you'd like to use it for.

> # Using with a fresh `git clone`

Reviewer: H1 after H2 is weird to me

When running `git clone`, just append `gittuf::` to the beginning of the URL of
the repository. For example,

- `gittuf::git@github.com:gittuf/gittuf`, if you're using SSH
- `gittuf::https://github.com/gittuf/gittuf`, if you're using HTTPS

# Using with an existing repository

In this case you'll need to set the remote for your repository (most likely
`origin`):

```bash
# For SSH
git remote set-url origin gittuf::git@github.com:gittuf/gittuf

# For HTTPS
git remote set-url origin gittuf::https://github.com/gittuf/gittuf
```

# Source Code

If you're interested in seeing how it works or improving it, the transport

> source code lives in [internal/git-remote-gittuf](../../internal/git-remote-gittuf).

Reviewer: can't this use the absolute path? `/internal/git-remote-gittuf`?
